Finally gets the most fun part of Cardiology ischemia and acute coronary syndrome
Imagine you're in the Ed when a new patient is rolled in
Bob is a 67 year old male with a history of diabetes
Hypertension
Hyperlipidemia and coronary artery disease who presents to the severe chest pain that started 30 minutes ago
Bob tells you that he has a history of chronic chest pain
It occurs every time you walked more than a hundred yards
Resolve completely with rest and nitroglycerin
Bob's describing history of stable angina
Angina is chest pain due to cardiac ischemia
Which is caused by an imbalance between the oxygen supply
+ oxygen demand of the heart
Myocardial oxygen supply
Depends on the hemoglobin concentration
An oxygen saturation which determine
The oxygen content of the blood
Oxygen supply also depends on diastolic perfusion pressure
Since the coronary arteries are filled by the backflow of blood from the aorta during diastole
And lastly oxygen supply depends on coronary vascular resistance
Which is determined by local regulation by the end of helium and extrinsic regulation by the sympathetic nervous system
Myocardial oxygen demand is determined by heart rate and contractility
You would expect a heart that is beating harder and faster
Have a higher metabolic demand
In addition oxygen demand is determined by the wall tension of the ventricles
When the oxygen supply cannot meet the oxygen demand ischemia occur
The subendocardium is The myocardium that is closest to the ventricular lumen
The subendocardium is particularly susceptible to ischemia
Because it is subjected to the highest pressure from The ventricle
It has fewer collateral connections
I'm supplying arteries must first pass through layers of Contracting myocardium
Atheroscleratic plaques
Cause stenosis of the coronary arteries
Which limits blood supply
When a coronary artery is greater than 70% included due to an atherosclerotics flag
The patient may be fun while it rest
But with any physical or emotional stress
The sympathetic nervous system increases heart rate contractility and blood pressure
All of which increase oxygen demand
So with exertion the demand increases but the supply cannot
And sub in a cardiovascular and Sue's
This is why chest pain experienced while walking up a flight of stairs or shoveling snow is very concerning for
For cardiac etiology
This exertional sub endocardial ischemia
A stable angina
Is transient and reversible
With rest the auction demand decreases
And ischemia resolved
The physiologic consequences of ischemia
Are due to the decrease in available ATP
Systolic contraction is inhibited but so is diastolic relaxation
Which is also an energy dependent process
In addition ION channel dysfunction can precipitate arrhythmias
Ischemia is reversible but prolonged ischemia
Can lead to irreversible infarction of cardiac muscle
Clinically ischemia is experience as angina pectoris
This visceral pain is usually poorly localized but is often retrosternal with radiation to the arm back neck
Rajah
It is usually described as pressure tightness or heaviness
Is not described as sharp or flirting
If your patient says it feels like there's an elephant sitting on my chest
Stampy concerned for cardiac ischemia
The discomfort show last minutes
Split-second Twins or chest discomfort is not cardiac ischemia
In addition to the pain there's several commonly associated symptoms
There is an autonomic surge due to the pain
So sympathetic activation causes tachycardia and diaphoresis
As well as peripheral vasoconstriction that least a cool clammy pale extremities
Parasympathetic activation causes nausea and vomiting
Due to impaired diastolic relaxation
The ventricular end-diastolic pressure increase
This pressure is transmitted back to the pulmonary vasculature
Causing dyspnea and Pulmonary vascular congestion
Also is systemic inflammatory response causes a low-grade fever
What does ischemia look like on an ECG
Sub endocardial ischemia appears as horizontal or downsloping ST depression
This means the segment between the QRS complex and the T wave will be below the bassline
Sub endocardial ischemia also results in T wave inversion
If the ischemia is severe it may affect the entire thickness of The myocardium known as transmural ischemia
Rather than just a subendocardium
Transmural ischemia appears as st-elevation
Meaning of c segment will be raised above Baseline
Unstable angina rest causes resolution of both the patient symptoms and the ECG abnormalities
And in fact when these patients are asymptomatic they usually have normal ECGs
Silent ischemia occurs when a patient has ECG findings consistent with ischemia
But they lack the characteristic chest pain
Ischemia without corresponding Angelina
Is more common in diabetics
Possibly due to diabetic neuropathy
As well as females and the elderly
Aside from stable angina there's another important ischemic syndrome called variant angina
Also known as Prinzmetal angina
This is a syndrome in which focal spasm of a coronary artery cuts off myocardial oxygen supply
Which causes ischemia an episodic Angelina
The mechanism is unclear
But it is not related to atherosclerosis plaques
Where a stable angina is caused by the inability to meet the oxygen demand of exertion
Prinzmetal angina is completely in oxygen supply problem
For this reason it often occurs at rest without any exertional trigger
The sub endocardial ischemia causes St depressions and T wave inversions on the ECG
But the spasm can be severe enough to cause transmural ischemia
So the ECG may show st-elevation
However there is no necrosis so symptoms and ECG changes are transient and reversible
Although the underlying causes unknown
Triggers include tobacco cocaine and triptans
The treatment is calcium channel blockers and nitrates
Activate or dilate the coronaries and reverse the spasm
In addition to smoking cessation
So now that you've established the Bob has a history of stable angina you ask him what was different about today that prompted
Need to visit
He says that he was walking calmly through his house when he experienced a sudden onset of crushing chest pressure
He sat down and you took nitroglycerin but the pain didn't get better
You called nine-one-one when he became unable to catch his breath
Now you're concerned the Bob is having an acute coronary syndrome
So what differentiates ischemic syndromes from acute coronary syndromes
Well ischemia is an oxygen supply and demand problem
Acute coronary syndromes are distinguished by athrosclerotic plaque rupture leading to coronary thrombosis
The standard progression goes from a normal blood vessel to a fatty streak
Which can progress to Forman athrosclerotic plaque
This plaque can other become obstructive which would cause stable angina
Or the black can rupture leading to an acute coronary syndrome
Plaque rupture often occurs even before the plaque causes symptomatic destruction
Thrombus formation is dangerous as you can cause partial or complete occlusion of a coronary artery
This will cause ischemia that does not simply resolved with rest
An ischemia may be severe enough to cause sub endocardial or transmural infarction
Infection causes the leak of intracellular proteins such as troponin and ck-mb
Into the blood
So the presence of these proteins in the blood is used as a marker for myocardial necrosis
The progression of ischemia to irreversible infarction takes about 20 minutes
Acute coronary syndromes are broken down into unstable angina and stemi nstemi all of which are caused by plaque rupture
Usher and coronary thrombosis
Unstable angina is defined as any new onset chest pain
Any chest pain that occurs at rest
Or any change in the quality like the frequency or duration of engine
At lower levels of exertion
It is caused by plaque rupture and thrombosis that causes partial occlusion of a coronary artery
This leads to the reversible sub endocardial ischemia
Causing ST depression and T wave inversion
However there was no necrosis so biomarkers such as troponin Czar negative
Unstable angina is a precursor to an MI
Nstemi stands for non-st elevation myocardial infarction
It is caused by plaque rupture and thrombosis leading to partial occlusion of a coronary artery that is severe enough to cause
Call sub endocardial infarction
It can also occur from complete occlusion of the coronary artery that causes sub endocardial infarction
You delete an area with enough collateral flow to prevent transmural infarction
This will also appears St depressions and T wave inversion
But because there is irreversible infarction the monocytes Valley proteins
So their blood will be positive for troponin and ck-mb
Stemi stands for st-elevation myocardial infarction
This occurs when a completely occlusive coronary thrombosis causes transmural necrosis
Which appears as St elevations
With positive biomarkers of necrosis
There's a typical progression of ECG changes during a stemi
Initial EUC hyperacute T waves which are wide-based
Tall relative to the r wave
And often localized to the region supplied by the culprit vessel
This should not be confused with peaked t-waves would you see with hyperkalemia
Peaked t-waves are tall and narrow with a sharp Peak
Enterprising diffusely
The hyperacute T waves quickly evolve into st-elevation
Over several hours
Q waves begin to form and the r wave amplitude decreases
Because the dead myocardium is not conducting electrical impulses
Over the first few days the T waves begin to invert
Anokiwave deepen
Within a few more days the st-elevation normalize
Leaving Q waves
And T wave inversions
The T wave inversions May resolve over a period of weeks
And the Q waves will be the only permanent sign of the semi
Often you should use the show st-elevation will also show St depressions in one or more other leads
Which are known as reciprocal changes
The causes unclear
What the reciprocal St depressions do not indicate separate sub endocardial ischemia in addition to the stemi
The inferior leads in the lateral leads 10 to show reciprocal changes
Such that in inferior wall stemi will show inferior St elevations
With lateral ST depression
And vice versa
Reciprocal changes are less likely with an anterior MI
The presence of reciprocal St depressions are important because it confirms the stemi diagnosis with high specificity
And also indicates a significant risk for poor outcome
How to recognize a posterior wall stemi
There would be st-elevation in the posterior leads
But we don't routinely put ECG leads on the patient's back
The answer is that we look for reciprocal changes in the anterior leads
Opposed to your am I is diagnosed by St depressions and tall are waves in Lee's V1 through V3
The tall are waves are essentially the inverse of the deep Q waves that you would expect
If they were supposed to release
This example shows St elevations in the inferior leads
2 3 and avf
Along with reciprocal St depressions in the lateral leads
1 and AVL
So Bob has chest pain that is occurring with minimal exertion and fails to resolve with rest
Which is different from his chronic stable angina
This would classify as a change in duration of Angelina
So you diagnose him with unstable engine
Is ECG shows nonspecific T wave changes in leads V1 through V4
Is blood is drawn and lab results show an elevated troponin
You go to notify Bob that he's having a heart attack
And when you look up at the monitor you see that his rhythm strip shows obvious St elevation in leads V1 through V4
Let's talk briefly about the management of a stemi
The defender of therapy is reperfusion by unblocking the culprit coronary artery
This is best achieved by percutaneous coronary intervention
PCI
This involves bringing the patient to the cath lab for angiography
With angioplasty and stenting
Ideally within 90 minutes from stemi diagnosis
If this is not possible
TPA should be administered to bust
Thrombus
And finally is a patient's coronary lesions are too expensive for stenting
A coronary artery bypass graft
Or cabbage should be performed by cardiothoracic surgeon
Patient should be medically optimized while preparing for definitive treatment
They should have a continuous ECG to monitor for arrhythmias
They should be on bed rest
To minimize cardiac oxygen demand
With supplemental oxygen to maximize oxygen supply
Morphine will help with the pain
Which will also decrease oxygen demand
Beta blockers are crucial because they will slow down the heart
Which decreases oxygen demand
Slowing down the heart also prolongs the duration of diastole
Which is when the coronary arteries fill
So it increases oxygen supply
Beta blockers also decrease the excitability of the heart
Which may prevent arrhythmias
In addition beta blockers prevent post-mi remodeling of The myocardium
However if a patient is in cardiogenic shock from the acute coronary syndrome
Beta blockers are contraindicated
As they can cause further cardiovascular collapse
Nitrates dilate the coronary arteries which improves oxygen supply
Trevino dilation they also decreased venous return
Which reduces oxygen demand
And also prevents further pulmonary vascular congestion
Crucially anti thrombolytic agents are used to prevent progression of a thrombus
Antiplatelet agents such as aspirin Clopidogrel or abciximab should be used in addition to anticoagulant
ACE inhibitors promote vasodilation and decrease afterload by Block in the formation of Angiotensin II
And decreases preload by inhibiting aldosterone dependent sodium and fluid retention
Dropping preload and afterload decreases oxygen demand and also prevents harmful ventricular remodeling
Statin should be used for plaque stabilization and for their anti-inflammatory effect
And should be continued long-term
To decrease the progression of atherosclerosis
Bob was treated with all the appropriate medications before being wheeled up to the cath lab for PCI
As you expected from zcg findings
Angiography showed complete occlusion of the proximal LED
Angioplasty opened up the artery
And a drug-eluting stent was used to keep it Peyton
Recovered uneventfully over the next few days
About a month later
He falls over this cardiologist
To see how the am I affected his heart function
Systolic function of the heart is Quantified
Using the ejection fracture
Which is defined as the stroke volume or end-diastolic volume - end-systolic volume
Divided by the end diastolic volume
Conceptually it is the amount of blood ejected in One Beat
Out of the total amount of blood that fills the left ventricle
Normal EF is 55 to 75%
And systolic heart failure is defined as an EF less than 40%
The EF is measured by echocardiogram
But interesting Li
There are three ECG findings that indicate original CF
It's a patient's ECG has Q waves
Then that indicates dead myocardium that is not contract
You can assume that the EF is reduced
Also a low voltage QRS complex
Indicate decrease electrical activity
Left bundle branch block indicates A disruption in the conduction system
If a patient has these features
They may have a reduced EF
And the absence of any of those features
Make systolic heart failure less likely
Pause ECG shows persistent Q waves in the anterior leads
As well as a left bundle branch block
It's your concern that is EF will be reduced
You confirm this with an echo which unfortunately
Chosen EF of 33%
Bob returns 3D a few weeks later with a different sharp chest pain that is worse when he takes a deep breath
You suspect pericarditis
Which is inflammation of the pericardium
It has many causes
Including post-mi
What can be immediate due to inflammation spreading from the necrotic myocardium
Or can we do to Dressler syndrome
Which is autoimmune pericarditis that occurs Weeks Later which is the likely cause and Bob Case
Pericarditis can also be due to infection
Particularly by Coxsackie virus or tuberculosis
Take me to the neoplasia
Autoimmune diseases such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis
Kidney failure such as uremic pericarditis
In addition to radiation therapy
Clinically it presents with sharp chest pain that is pleuritic meaning worse with deep inspiration
And positional meaning is better with sitting up and leaning forward
It is treated with anti-inflammatories
NSAIDs and colchicine
And usually resolves completely in a few weeks
On ECG pericarditis causes diffuse St elevations and PR depression
Mean the segment between the P wave and the QRS complex
Is below the Baseline
Because of the SD elevations it can be mistaken for a stemi
Which is managed completely differently
If you see St elevations always look to see if there diffuse
Like in pericarditis
Or following anatomical pattern
Like in a stemi
Pericarditis is often accompanied by a pericardial effusion
Which is a fluid accumulation in the pericardial space
This plant's electrical signal and cause a low voltage QRS complex on ECG
Meaning of QRS amplitude is less than 5 mm in the limb leads
Or less than 10 mm in a precordial leads
In a large effusion the heart may actually swing back and forth while floating in pericardial fluid
Which causes the height of the QRS complex to very
From beat to beat
Known as electrical alternans
When a pericardial effusion becomes large enough it will compress the heart
This prevents the chambers from expanding during filling
Cosmic drop in stroke volume and cardiac output
This is called a cardiac tamponade
The outcome is Becks Triad of hypotension
Jvd
And distant heart sounds
As well as possible pulsus paradoxus
It is treated by draining the pericardial fluid with a needle via pericardiocentesis
Or surgically
Via pericardial window